From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes or weekly discussion with
web developer and technologist Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number one 82 recorded
live Wednesday, September 30th, 2009. Support for
Hansel minutes is provided by
Telerik rad controls, the most
comprehensive suite of components for
windows forms and asp.net web
applications online@wwwdottelrik.com. In this episode,
Scott discusses the history and
future of the web with
instructor and web standards advocate,
Molly . Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes
and I am here in
Monterrey, Mexico, and I have
the pleasure of sitting down
in person with Molly, whole
slug from molly.com. The legend
in person. Thank you so
much. Thank you, Scott. It's
a pleasure to be here.
Molly is a web evangelist
around developer relations for the
opera browser, opera.com. And she's
also the author of 35
books, including the very popular
Zen of CSS design. Molly
has also a longtime relationship
with the W3C standards body,
including being on the CSS
three working group, the CSS
working group, or the CSS
work we're working on CSS
three. Right? So you have
a credentials as long as
my arm around standards on
the web. I've been involved
for a long time. Yes.
And did you just fall
into this one day? Yeah.
You know, when I was
growing up, it wasn't like
there was an option to
become a web developer mom.
When I grow up, I
want to be a web
developer. We didn't have that.
So yeah, it was just
a matter of being in
the right place at the
right time and having gone
to, you know, a certain
conference or something and somebody
going, Oh, that HTML stuff.
Oh, well, yeah, put Molly
on it. Or, you know,
so everything was a bit
of everything that happened was
sort of non, not planned,
definitely not planned. And it's
just been a wild ride.
Very, very wild, interesting ride
to grow up with the
web. And this started somewhere
around 92. Well, I've been
in it, I've been in
it since about 88 or
so, something like that. So
I started my career around
then and I was already
a technical writer. I was
doing other things, getting into
technology more and more and
more of an interest in
technology. And, you know, so
I was around the internet
used net gopher back in
the day, back in the
day, BBS is all the
way. Totally. Yeah. So it
was a really great time.
And then of course, when
the web came along and,
and you know, my first
view of it was, you
know, on the, on the
line, you know, on the
line command, a command line
there using, you know, an
Apache server and Lynx browser
and checking out what this
was all about, you know,
C so I, I, the
great fortune to have been
at the earliest point of
the web's birth and, you
know, have grown up with
it. So I think that's
part of the reason that,
you know, it's been a
highly productive career for me
because there's just been so
much cool stuff going on,
But being there at the
beginning, like when I was
there and, you know, Jeannie
and prodigy and CompuServe, you
know, I could stuff 95
a month, all you could
eat from the hours of,
And I ran a wild
cat PBS, but there's a
different team being there. I
had a multiline Wildcat video.
We did a show with
the creators of the Wildcat
PBS I'm seriously impressed. They're
very cool people. You should
listen to that show, but
that doesn't, that means I've
been a user since day,
day zero, but that's a
big difference between being a
user and being interested in
driving the direction of the
way. When did you start
pushing the direction things were
going, as opposed to just
consume? That's a very interesting
question, because I think it
was, it's just in my
nature. I've always been, you
know, when I was a
kid, I, you know, I
was growing up and I
was thinking about the peace
Corps as a future. I've
always been, you know, a
bit of a, of a,
of a let's get stuff
done. You know, let's not
just talk about it, let's
go and change the world
and that sort of my
personality. So I think it
was inevitable that, that when
the web came along immediately,
I began to see it
will. In fact, it was
even before the web. I
have to be honest, the
moment that I really knew
that that, that I was
going to be somehow significantly
involved in a push forward
in technology, happens on cue
link with my, with my
Commodore 64, when I saw
international chat for the first
time international. Not, yes. And
it w it was people
from around the world in,
in pretty much real time.
I mean, we're talking about
300 baud modems here, but,
but I mean, amazing. You
know, I knew that this
was the beginning. There was
to some instinct in a
Score with angle brackets. Yes,
Exactly. It was like, it
was like, I could do
the peace Corps from my
bedroom here, you know, and
I, and then, you know,
of course that morphed into
later becoming the web and
becoming a huge opportunity, you
know, to, to move things
forward and to take this
a little further, I have,
my youngest brother always teases
me. He says, you were
talking about the NPR. And
he says, you know, I'm
a PBS, or like the
NPR of the web Right.
NPR for our international listeners
is the national public radio.
Yeah, exactly. Or the PBS
public broadcasting system. In other
words, those, those systems that
are of the people like
the BBC. Right. So, so
the idea being that, that
I've always had that attitude
and that, that was always,
you know, my personality, I
think, so the two just
meshed right away. And then
I began to see, as
you know, I've always had
an interest in education and
I began to see people
really struggling. And I got,
you know, I began to
teach web design classes and
the more and more I
got into that, I was
offered a book deal. I
got, you know, and the
deeper I got the deeper,
you know, the faster it
went. Yeah. There's, it's interesting.
There's a, I work with
the team works at Microsoft
developer network and I was
reading some research and they
were talking about different kinds
of personalities that exist on
the, on the web and
in developer communities. And with,
with all of these kinds
of research, they inevitably end
up using a alliteration and
they had different kinds of
people. And it was like
critic consumer collector. And there
was one collaborator, right. And
I put up a Twitter
poll up and I said,
well, which one of these
personalities are you? And I
got chastised for using radio
buttons instead of check boxes.
Cause people wanted to be
multiple personality. I think there
is that, I mean, we
are, we are not one
thing, are we sure, But
it sounds like a collaborator.
I mean, you're bringing multiple
people together. Yeah, Absolutely. I'm
actually Tim Berners Lee, the
inventor of the worldwide web
during one of our conversations
at T pack got very
excited. And actually he used
a Malcolm Gladwell name, which
was the connector. They says,
you're the connector, you're the
connector. That's one of the
nicest things. Yeah. Well, it's
different. The collaborator collaborators collaborate
in, in work environments. And
of course now that I'm
part of an actual team
of people. Whereas I was
independent from most of my
career. The collaboration factor is
really important, but the connection
factor, bringing people together, linking
this is part of the
philosophy that emerged for me
with the early web, where
I began to see very
clearly that the link was
a representative of human links
as well. And this is,
you know, this sounds a
little, maybe a little off
to some up, but it's
not really, if you look
at the writing and the,
and the discussions about with
Tim Berners Lee, a physicist,
a brilliant physicist, brilliant scientist,
and an, and the inventor
of the worldwide web. We're
not talking about, you know,
we're talking about incredible here,
give him some credit that
one small thing that changed
the world. Right? Exactly. If
he doesn't get a Nobel,
I'm going to be surprised
he's already won the Japan
prize. But that, that, that
aside, he, his early writings
were also sociologically important. He
always saw the social aspect.
And as time went on,
you look at his writings
and how he's become even
more and more into that.
So I don't think it's
wrong, you know, to say
that it's not me. It
was there in the heart
of the web already. Yeah.
You know, cause we're here
at the software guru conference
in Mexico. And in both
of our talks, we always
inject the sense of the
social web. My talk was
about social networking for developers.
And one of the questions
that someone asked, which I
thought was kind of an
audacious question was I may
have been a joke, but
they said, what is the
future of social networking on
the web? My first impression
was I am no more
qualified to answer that question
then than anyone. But the
thing that really struck me
was that it's changing fundamentally
how we interact with people.
I mean, do you ever
have conversation like with, let
me give you a perfect
example as a, as a,
as a professional speaker in
a, in a collaborator and
a connector, you're going all
over the world. You very
likely have had the experience
where you have interacted with
someone for months on a
project. Having never met them
or shook their hand and
then simply go, Oh, and
here we are in the
same country or the same
city. And you just keep
talking. The conversation moves through.
In fact, in fact, I
have years of experience like
that, even back in the
BBS days, when we would
do our GTS, our get
togethers where people would actually,
you know, you'd have the
original, the original tweetups. And
I think that, I think
that it, you said something
in your session yesterday about,
you know, the need, like
you were making jokes about
how, you know, most of
us want to connect with
people, but we don't necessarily
want to do it with
them without yeah, exactly. Without
having to actually be with
people. You know, we're always
looking for ways to do
that, which in a way
was, you know, it's obviously
your humor, but it it's
a point there, there are
times that it's an opt
in thing. And I really
liked that. I liked the
fact that we have an
entire social world that we
can opt in or out
of, depending upon, you know,
our mood or our needs,
you know? And that really
is very cool to answer
a question like that though,
is, is an impossibility. First
of all, anybody who's walking
around with a crystal ball
and says, this is the
future of the web. I'm
not going to believe them.
And I would suggest to
others that they think very
carefully and listen carefully to
what that person is saying
and weigh it on their
own measure. Because I don't
think we can tell the
future. We've already seen that
as we think we know
what the future is, what
as we were talking about
with XHTML right. Just yesterday,
suddenly something happens and the
whole world changes Right yesterday.
I said to you how
proud I was that one
of our websites was validated
as XHTML strict. And I
kind of got you to
look on your face. That
kind of said like, Oh,
welcome to last year. Yeah.
Welcome to 10 years ago
for some of us, for
some of them. Yeah. But
actually realistically we do see
a huge shift now technologically,
where X H smell too
is, is, has lost it
at the end of this
year. Its charter is up
December 31st of this year. And
actually each mill to work
will stop. And the W3C
has made a very overt
statement that in fact it
is putting its energy toward
HTML five, which is changing
the ball game completely. I
mean, we're talking about absolutely
shifting toward application mentality and
software development, as opposed to
just, I shouldn't say that
he's just writing pages, but
it's no longer a document
format only, But forgive my
ignorance. I'm going to ask
some questions. I know the
answers to, but other ones
I'm just purely ignorant about
and I'll let the listener,
that's an exercise to the
listener to figure out whether
they have any idea. Okay.
If I'm completely clueless about
this, but is HTML five
XML or is it SGML
Oh, wow. Okay. So there's
a, there's a good answer
for this. Let me, let
me explain. If we look
at HTML five, there are
because of the XML, the
fact that XML is so
widely, widely used and so
much extra everything at W3C,
pretty much outside of HTML.
CSS is done in XML
serialization. So HTML five has
a responsibility to be backward
compatible XHTML too. Of course,
this is one of the
reasons that it probably, you
know, ran into a dead
end. Part of the problem
is, is it's not backward
compatible with non XML documentation.
So, and mom typing. So
the thing is, is that
if you were running an
XHTML to document and delivering
it as XML or application
XML, or XHTML, you would
actually not be able to
have an older browser appear
on that site. They would
either that or an error
would be thrown. It's very,
very, you know, I don't
know how, you know, different
browser vendors would implement that,
but you know, it, it,
it just basically says this
application can't run. Okay. And
your programming stops there. And
that could be okay at
a very high level of
pro production, but for the
democratic web, it simply doesn't
work. So the ideologies in
HTML five were not only
to maintain that backward compatibility
so that we always have
the SGML and the HTML
language, but to also be
inclusive of XML syntax. So
there are two ways that
you can go about writing
HTML five and you can
do it in XML syntax.
Right. What do you mean?
Meaning strict well, Well formed.
Isn't the right word? Well
formed. Well, yeah, strict would
be the rigor XML rigor.
Okay. So the, you know,
every attribute value is quoted.
You use a trailing slash
you make sure that all
your non empty elements are
closed. Exactly. All of the
rules, but the, if you
are going to do X
XML there, you have to
serve as XML. Okay. Application.
I see. Okay. So when
we say serve as one
of the things that you've
been talking about that we
haven't called that explicitly is
the importance of mind types,
which I think is one
of the number one things
that people ignore on the
web And, and that ignorance
that ignorance is, is, is
becomes more of a problem
when the more media types
we get, right? The more,
the more we have needs
there. So I think in,
in an internet Explorer really
never implemented the mine types
for XHTML, which is one
of the reasons that I
think it's not Microsoft's fault.
I mean, there was a
general consensus among browser vendors
that, that XHTML was a
nonstarter. Despite the fact that
we learned a great deal.
I think one of the
things we learned was how
to be better coders. We
learned how to respect the
rigor. And one of my
fears about HTML five is
that because in this other,
in this, in the notation,
the HTML five notation, if
you're using SGML notation or,
well, both are SGML really.
So if you're using the
HTML notation versus the XML
notation in HTML five, the
sloppiness all comes back. If
you want it to, you
don't have to, Hey everybody,
this is Scott coming at
you from another place in
time. No doubt. You probably
bump into testing tasks now,
and then, and your work
and, you know, writing functional
tests is probably not your
favorite thing. It's kind of
difficult. It takes time and
the results can be dubious.
Well, get ready to start
liking tests. Thanks to with
the, the new whereby testing
framework building web automation test
is a breeze. You've got
code automation with advanced asp.net
Ajax, and several light applications.
You can write a single
test, have it executed against
multiple browsers at once. You'd
benefit from a rich API
there's link support integration with
visual studio unit testing, also
in unit X unit and
MB unit, not to mention
the free rappers for Telerik
rad controls for ESPN and
Ajax, and several light, all
shipping with Telerik's new testing
tool. One of the best
features, the web testing framework,
which is developed by art
of test is it's absolutely
free. Freddie got hooked on
web by testing framework, start
using it right away, go
to tellerik.com for more info.
Thanks a lot. So for
the six of us that
are listening that have actually
followed this so far, let's
just do a real quick
reset. So SGML, it has
tags and elements that we're
familiar with. It uses open,
open angle brackets, right? Except
it's not required to close
the tech. No, no, Let's
go back a sec. Okay.
So SGML the standard generalized
markup language was a language,
a document management Metta language
that was created by in
the sixties, by a guy
named Charles Goldfarb who was
a lawyer. So it's a
huge spec. What it simply
does is it basically create
it. It basically has in
it semantics that Tim Berners-Lee
and his colleagues used to
create HTML, which is a
completely different, very, very simplistic
for the web markup language.
So the parents of HTML,
you know, HTML is an
application of SGML or a
subset of XML is also
an application of SGML. Okay.
So it's like, what we
did is we went back
in the W3C and we
reviewed the sloppiness and we
viewed the problems that we
were finding with that notation
issue. And we said, okay,
we want the XML rigor
XML brings this strictness, this
rigor back into, into it,
makes it more of a,
of a, a programmatic, you
know, process unforgiving on purpose,
on purpose. Right. But still
forgiving. And in that it's
HTML vocabulary, right? So it's
backward compatible, right? So as
long as you're not delivering
it as an XML application,
that is going to be
available to the masses for
as long as browsers are
capable of handling that. So
actually XML, when we look
at XML itself, it like
its parent SGML is also
a Metta language. In other
words, we use its guidelines
and its syntax to create
other ontologies and languages. So
HTML is just one of
the vocabularies atrial five is,
is, and it includes both
of these vocals. So does
that mean that H so
HTML five, I've got this,
this taxonomy, this, this glossary
of choices. I different tags
I can use and I
can choose to serve it
in a less rigorous, more
SGML like format where I
don't necessarily close every tag,
but I have a mind
type that explicitly declares my
intent to do that. Or
I can return HTML five
and use application forward slash
XML indicating that I choose
to opt into that record.
Right? So either you are
delivering your HTML five document
as an XML document, in
which case you must be
confined to that rigor, or
you are using HTML and
you are sending it as
text HTML text. Yeah. And
that is, and that does
not require the rigor, which
is a concern, a concern
for me as an educator,
I think we can still
maintain good practice and make
sure we still, you know,
when you're working in cross
document management, as I know
you probably have done many
times, it becomes a nightmare
when you have everybody just
different coding styles, getting away
from their HTML. Yeah, exactly.
But I want to get
back to this, this, this,
the importance of the mind
type. Could you juxtapose that
with doc type? Because it
feels like the new web
is putting much more import
on mime type when it
would have previously. I would've
thought about doc type stuff.
Well, actually there's a big
mystique about, or a mystery.
I think about doc types,
that probably would be good
to demystify for the audience.
A doc type declaration is
a piece of SGML that
exists at the top of
documents that are SGML or
in the case of XML,
you have an XML declaration
followed by a doc type
declaration. So it's both. So
essentially those declarations were passive.
They were not meant to
do anything, but to declare
which language and which language
version you are using. And
the only time that it
would become active is when
you instigated purposely validation. Okay.
So you went to a
validator or you use some
validation tool. The doc type
was then in his used
venues, this is still true
today. The doc type then
looks at the spec and
compares what you say you're
writing to, to the document
and throws back errors or
warnings based on what you
have done or not done
in that document. Okay. So
really when we think about
doc types, we're thinking about
something that, that was very
passive and was never meant
to be what it does
now in the I E
process, when I E six
came along, there were, there
was the implementation of the
HTML box model. And there
was also in, in the
newer rendering. And  when
it came out very, very,
you know, great CSS browser.
It would have lasted five
years if it, if it
hadn't been sure, but of
course, five years, a long
time to wait. But that
aside the, there was in
fact in the Trident, the
CSS rent, rent box model,
rendering, and box model rendering
is different, right? Yes. You
just use code names and
things. Oh, I'm not supposed
to do that. You can
use them, just make sure
the listeners know, Try it.
And the is the, is
the rent is the engine,
which within the layout engine
inside of I E right.
Okay. And each, each, each
browser has a different layout
engine. Although we see certain
layout engines now being adopted,
like for example, both Safari
and Chrome use a WebKit
engine or pieces of that
engine is the gecko would
be for Mozilla opera is
Presto. Yes. Yes. Okay. Okay.
And we're about to emerge
with a new, new version
of that. Very soon, if
we go back to the
dock type issue, what happened
there is. So in order
to be able to make
I E run so that
CSS would be more available
and more consistent across browsers.
Some people at Microsoft, including
contact shellac, who is well
known for micro formats. And
I know that, you know,
naming names is always confusing
for people, but he really
deserves some, some credit here
because he had built the
Mac version of, of I
E prior to that, that
what was known as the
Tasman engine. So he took
the doc type along with
somebody else, and they said,
look, what we're going to
do in ice six for
windows is we're going to
put this in there. And
we're gonna use this as
a switching mechanism so that
if people use the proper
doc type, that will automatically
switch the browser,  specifically
into the mode where the
box model is consistent with
other rendering engine box models,
so that we get a
consistent look and feel and
are able to use CSS
based layouts consistently. So there's,
no, This model is padding
margins, right. It's the core
model of what we have
now in CSS. Okay. Okay.
So in order to use
CSS, well, cascading style sheets,
well, and get away from
the deeply nested table based
layouts of that were causing
us certain problems and, you
know, in maintenance and okay.
I was the King of
one pixel gifts inside of
it Too. I mean, I,
you know, if there was,
if there was, you know,
a crime against web standards,
I've committed it, you know,
that's why I think that's
also part of evangelism. You
get, you get the religion
because you've done all the
mistakes, right? So this is,
it's a very complex issue.
And it's of course, related
to how, how browsers now
other browsers adopted that. So
now we have this doc
type switching, and this now
puts a lot of, a
lot of pressure on the
doc type to be something
more than it ever was.
It is essentially a hack,
but it was one that
was necessary to advance the
web, I think. And that's
why I wanted to call
out, you know, some people
there to, to let you
know, let folks know that,
you know, there's some good
work that people have done,
but it's also added a
layer of confusion for that
reason. So it's interesting when
we compare the doc types,
now we would go over
to HTML five and we
look at the doc type
and the doc type is,
is simply angle bracket, exclamation
point doc type in lowercase,
HTML. That is the doc
type. There's nothing else. It
just says the kind of
document. This is, is an
HTML. That's all it says.
And it will flip the
doc type switch. That's too
simple. How could that possibly
work? Cause it's too simple.
It's brilliant in some ways.
And it's also very controversial.
I like it. I saw
it. It made sense to
me immediately because, well, I
think of the growth of
the web, I think of
like a cone, like an
ice cream cone moving out,
right? Like where you are
moving out and wider and
wider and wider, right. The
world wide web. Right. So
we, we often forget the
world and we often forget
the wide. So we just
think about the web. And
I think we have to
think about the width of
it and the breadth of
it and how it's going
to grow. And that to
me is representative of saying,
it doesn't matter. This is
just HTML. Okay. So before
you had started saying that
that HTML five is turning
everything on its ear, that
this document focused model that
kind of timid originally in
versioned and visioned rather, excuse
me, is now really an
application focused model. Yes. And
I think that's the inevitable,
you know, the thing that
the, the buzz about web
2.0 and Ajax and all
those technologies that at the
turn of our time, and
in 2000, 2001, around that,
around that time, it, we
really are in the web
2.0 sense without the buzz
word, a web of application,
We're bringing X windows to
the web now. Yes, yes.
We are building software. That's,
that's a different thing Flat
out doing that. It's like,
yes, it's like a, the
web, you know, it's like,
you know what, it was
called VT 100, you know,
and everything was a dump
terminal. And now we have
dump terminals that are dual
core processors that can do
30 BT 100, except with
seven 20  It's hysterical.
But it's getting, I wouldn't
say that quite yet, but
it's, it's working toward it.
I mean, it's definitely, you
know, somebody asked me in
a class about HTML five
just last week, you know,
why do we need to
do this? Can't we just
stop right here. And it's
like, no, because where's the
fun in that That would
be done. I think was
a good question to ask,
can we just be done
for a minute? Okay. No.
Yeah. You know, I just,
I can't ever, I mean,
and that's something I have
to say to people that
are interested in careers in
the web, they have to
really think about, you know,
the fact that nothing is
ever the same and they
have to be willing to
be agile themselves and able
to switch horses. Midstream. You've
described it to, to have
a little analogy overload here.
I've described it as like,
when you're a little kid
and you're running down the
Hill, as long as you
don't look at your feet,
you can run really, really
fast. And then as soon
as you go, Oh crap,
I'm running way too. Right.
On your face. Yeah, exactly.
That's a good analogy. That
is the web. Now I
profess my ignorance in this,
but as I understand it,
would you say it is
fair to say that the
thing that is kind of,
I wouldn't say holding HTML
five back, but a point
of contention is the codex
around the video tag. I
understand that every browser vendors
putting their weight behind a
different co compressor decompressor, I'm
not so sure it's different
browser vendors that are the
problem. The problem is simply
making sure that we end
up choosing or whatever, if
there's more than one even
better. Right. Choice. Of course,
I'm always about that licensing
and things. Yes. There's patents.
Okay. It's about patents. Yeah.
And software, of course, software
patents, another really, really hot
area where there's going to
be really religious Wars. And
that's what we see HTML
five in and of itself
is highly controversial. There are
many things about it. In
essence, the, you know, that,
that people are not happy
with it is an ongoing
issue. It's, you know, the
spec is, is, is going
to take time. But what's
really interesting is the implementation.
And this is my message
about HTML five, whether we
like it or not implementation
will Trump, the specification, if
the, if it's in the
browser, you know, people are
gonna use it. Right. Yeah.
And it is going into,
in some form, every single
browser, we're all working on
it. Opera Chrome, of course,
is bleeding the way Google
is. We have to be
careful with Google because they
call everything HTML five. And
sometimes it isn't like, you
know, like maybe geolocation, somebody
will say a geolocation API.
All right. So let me
step back a second. And
also mentioned that the other
thing to remember about HTML
five is that it's not
just a document language. We
have new sides to, you
know, we have new elements,
we have new ways of
doing things in the document,
but the other piece of
it, and of course, Oh,
the other thing is enhanced
forms, web forms, 2.0 Yeah.
I think that people right
now are focusing on the
video tag. If you ask
the average, Joe Canvas would
be their, their focus because
this is something very new.
But we also have to
remember that the other side
of HTML five is in
fact API APIs, it's all
about being able to expand
through programming and the application
programming interfaces, what we can
do with a browser. So
that's really where the critical
shift has, has come. So
to get back to the
HTML five, as a, as
a application based, what's really
happening there is that we,
the whole ideology is that
we will be able to
create apps and the software,
the browser, right. It's the
runtime environment. And this is
a fascinating kind of concept
where in essence, this is
a metaphor, but, and it
may be a bad one,
but I like it anyway.
Cause it helps kind of
clarify that browsers now are
really becoming the dot XC
or the.app where our applications
run. Okay. And, and we
have the browser runtime environment
and we really see every
single browser on board with
this, every single browser. So
when you see buy-in from
the W3C and every single
major browser vendor. Yeah. That
to me says, we gotta
pay attention. Well, it's, it's
pretty clear that everyone is
trying to push things forward.
And I know sometimes the
people say that like Microsoft's
trying to hold things back.
I, some people have said
that some of our critics
and I just am watching
all of this, I'm not
involved in any of those
groups, but I found that
the recent announcement of Google
Chrome frame, Oh, that'd be
a really interesting, it's almost
like we're playing thumb war
now. I mean, they actually
use the IAE extensibility model
to insert the, the, the
WebKit base rendering engine inside
of the I E Chrome.
So Chrome within Chrome. It's
very interesting. Yeah. That's, that's
good. Yeah. But the thing
is you have to remember,
okay, Google is calling frame
a plugin. I'm not so
sure it's a plugin. I
don't, I don't think it's
a true plugin because while
it is being something that
gets injected, so somebody has
to download it right. And,
and deploy it in their
it department or on their
local machine, if they want
that value. Right. The other
piece is, is that it
developers then have to say
in their documents Yes. With
an interesting tag that is
itself controversial. It's an extra
way. Compat, the XCA compat
stuff is controversial. I don't
think in the case of,
of frame, it doesn't have
anything to do with versioning,
which is a whole nother
hold. Other Holy war going
on A declaration that Google
is saying is that as
I understand it, that Google
wave is so advanced and
so wonderful. And so super
duper that you need this
basically they're punting on compatibility
and standards. And just saying,
we'll run great on our
browser. Yeah. It's a radical
move. And I'm not sure
it's going to work because
it takes both opt in
from the individual or the
it departments. Right. And or
it also takes the developers
knowing how to activate it.
But it is a statement
if anything that, that, you
know, Google and Google is
doing some very interesting work,
but do we really want,
we really want one engine
and that's, that's really the
question we want one in,
because even so let's say,
I mean, many people have
said, even people within IAE
have stated sometimes as on
a sidebar conversation, well, why
don't we just put WebKit
or gecko in and get
rid of tried it? Well,
of course Trident is the
rendering engine, but everything else,
you, you know, you have
a browser that is tied
to OSS, which is part
of the problem. It's, you
know, the, the, the difficulty
with Microsoft, the challenge that
you have as developers at
Microsoft browsers is that you
are unable to, to create
the software as quickly as
others, because you have to
test in every, in, in
your office environments. Right. And
I think that that's really
what, what the Chrome frame
thing is about. It's trying
to say, yo, Microsoft, you
know, I can inject this
into you. Yes. And, and
we also see that has
happened earlier via Dean Edwards
did htc.htc, which are our
internet Explorer only technologies. And
he did JavaScript that basically
added, if you would run
this library and added all
the features that were in
an ISX, right. There's actually
an interest. There's some interesting
work that was being done
by the, the DLR team
at Microsoft, that dynamic language
runtime that would allow you
to have a script that
would say open script tag
type equals text slash Python.
Oh wow. And then we
would use Silverlight, we'd bring
up an invisible zero by
zero Silverlight plugin, like a
flash plug in server light.
Then you would take that
script, but actual inline script,
just instead of JavaScript it's
Python or Ruby, and then
drop it into the Silverlight.
So the server light provides
the engine. It's similar to
the Chrome frame idea. It's
like injecting another technology. Well,
we can script the web
was JavaScript. Why not script
it with Ruby? And then
it has full Dom access
and you can write client
side routes. You're making, you're
making me have goosebumps, you
know, cause this is, this
is, this is the stuff
that gets me excited because
we are talking about complex
application development. And I think
it's scary also. I mean,
I think a lot of
people out there in the
field are worried and I
want to just say that
that's the nature of our
beast. And I think that
we're going to be fine.
You know, that the things
you're doing today, like my
joke yesterday, when you said,
well, I just, you know,
I just built XHTML one
strictly I said XHTML is
dead, but it's like, you
know, it was a joke
on my part because XHTML,
you can still use it
and serve it as text
HTML. XHTML 1.0, strict as
a perfectly legitimate language for
the current web, My ugly
Netscape three. It still looks
great. It's still render sure.
I can still open text
files. So as long as
I have that, Yes, that's
what I would, I would
say, as long as you've
got that backward compatibility and
you're able to progressively enhance
this is, this is how
we grow wide. Yeah. Let
me ask one last question
and, and forgive me if
this is an inappropriate question,
but why do we need
opera? You had presented, well,
why don't we pick WebKit
why don't we pick gecko?
Why don't we pick Presto
and why do we need
more choice? Well, Yes. I,
I, I don't know. I
don't know how to answer.
Why do we need opera?
Because actually it's, it's a
hard question because it doesn't
make logical sense to me.
Opera was there very early
on operas started building browser
technology before just about anybody.
Okay. Pretty amazing stuff. Early
versions of opera, the scale,
the ability to scale The
zoom, that if you think
of a feature, we probably
invented it. Probably that doesn't
mean we did it well.
And we also became the
kitchen sink. I think in
a lot of ways just
offer on the web because
the desk, because of that,
on the desktop, we do
own the mobile web. We
are, we opera mini and
opera mobile opera mobile is,
is used on more devices
in the world than any
other browser. So we own
that space. And that's where
it's, it's interesting to know
that opera comes out of
Telenor. So the Norwegian tele
tele communications network, right? So
this is where they started.
And so their interest in
their location, the Scandinavians of
course, with Erickson and Nokia
and the rise of the
mobile, the mobile lifestyle really
came from both Asia and
Scandinavia. Right? And so I
think it's only a natural
thing. Now, let me just
say this. What is interesting
about operas technology is what
is in our core is
what goes in every single
device. So the idea is
to get the best quality
experience on every device. And
so we are device oriented,
as well as desktop oriented.
We have had a big
struggle on the desktop. I
think there were a lot
of reasons that that has
happened and far probably we
could talk far, far into
the night about that, but
we are very much, if
you notice, there's a lot
of activity. I mean, clearly
opera's becoming a sponsor at
a major conference in all
parts of the world. Like
here, we've got a whole
evangelical team working on, not
on, not necessarily on evangelizing
opera. We have plenty of
people doing that, but, but
really if you listen to
what people from opera talking
about, they're talking about the
quality of experience and code
and what the web is
becoming. And that is what
we've always done. We've always
been a leader in innovation.
And I think that's what
opera it does offer an
innovative opera is the, is
the innovator. And it's the
little engine that could, and
I think that we are
really, you know, we're really
going to make a presence
on the, on the desktop,
in the future, because of
course we have some wonderful
people, well known designers who
have come in to fix
the problem with the Chrome,
with the Chrome, because the
rendering is great. The problem
really has been that, that
it's a kitchen. There's just
too much. Yes. There was
just too much. And how
do you get your mom
to like, like that? So
now we have a lovely
interface and I think that's
good. Well, very cool. Well,
thank you so much, Molly.
for hanging out with
me today and chatting up
web standards. Thank you so
much, Scott. It's been a
pleasure. This has been another
episode of Hansel minutes and
I'll see you again next
week.